---
layout: post
title: "Meeting 7"
date: 2012-09-07 13:12
comments: true
categories: meetings blog
author: Alex Burkhart
---

## Goals

Discuss the requirements for second deliverable. Set goals for each
team member for the next week.

## Discussion

We reviewed what would be necessary for the next milestone. In
particular, we tried to nail down how we will model the data within
the system.

We discussed how the data would flow through the
system. We needed to determine exactly how we'd handle obtaining data
from the user of the system, and how that would translate into a
query for a recommendation.

We have tentatively proposed a system that involves multiple discrete
components. A Filter step, a Inference step, and Learning
step. Filtering would include removing games that do not match basic
criteria such as Game Length or Number of Players. The remaining games
would be sent forward into the Inference Engine. This is where we will
use expert information to find games that fit the remaining
criteria. Next we will send the games into a step that finds games
similar to the games recommended by the Inference Engine. These games
are then filtered again for basic criteria fitness.

This system has the advantage of separating the recommendations into
independent components which we can provide a clear division of work,
experiement with different ideas, and analyze the algorithms'
performance.


## Results

Chris is going to upload photos of the dataflow charts we
created. Ryan volunteered to make a digital version of the dataflow
chart. Alex will begin scheduling expert interviews with CABS members,
with special emphasis to members of the CABS Design Group. Alex will
also publish this meeting's notes on the website.

## Attendance

-   Ryan McGowan
-   Chris Powers
-   Alex Burkhart (scribe)

David was unable to make it for the meeting time we had arranged. He
let us know ahead of time that he would be unavailable.

## Location

Physics Research Building first floor lobby.

